you can sign up for outgrow at outro dot
co forward slash tom that's outro dot
co forward slash tom and get a special
30-day free trial with no credit card
required
start taking action today and check out
outgrow
right now all right guys take care and
be legendary
and when you stimulate mtor it inhibits
autophagy
which is your self-cleansing mechanisms
so it actually
works against you in terms of aging
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i'm here with dr frank
lippman dr frank lippin welcome to the
show
thank you for having me i'm really
excited man i read your book
it was really prescriptive and that is
something that i respect a lot i think
taking you know
with every day that passes it seems like
health
gets more and more complicated and the
way that you were able to
distill it down and actually tell people
go do this
i thought was really powerful and the
new book of course are the new rules of
aging well
which i'm very excited to talk to you
about but i actually want to start back
in apartheid south africa
the insights that you have around like
what apartheid is and what it stood for
and why
it doesn't work when you begin to
extrapolate into things like medicine i
thought was incredibly powerful
so what was it like growing up in
apartheid and
what did you take away as you went into
medicine
well you know i grew up in uh and i was
born 1954 so i grew up in the 50s and
60s
in south africa during apartheid but i
grew up with very
very liberal left-wing parents so i sort
of grew up
knowing that the system was rotten so
you just start questioning everything
and the medical system was just another
system
to question um one thing i heard you
give a talk and you said that apartheid
stands for
separate and then coming into the
western medical establishment you said
that
same notion of the separateness
of not treating the body like a holistic
thing
and that same and i assume that's what
you mean when you say that the system
was rotten
so one how did you begin to realize that
did you hone in right away on that
separateness the way that they were
treating the the symptoms rather than
the causes or was it when you got
involved in acupuncture you began to
learn a new way
how did that happen i think you know you
know i went to medical school you know
my brother
went to medical school and if you're a
smart kid in south africa in those days
you went to medical school i don't even
question it
um and in the beginning i got
brainwashed like every other doctor
thinking western medicine was the answer
but then after my training i went to
work in the bush
and i got exposed to traditional healers
called sangomas and i noticed that some
of the patients we weren't helping that
the sangomas were helping
so it opened my mind a little bit to
question the system or to realize that
there may be other ways
but i was still you know heavily
brainwashed by western medicine and i
thought that was
the answer um and then you had to put
your finger on what the brainwashing of
the western system is how would you
define it
um i defined it probably as a cult
you know what they do they in cults they
deprive you of sleep
they force all this knowledge into you
and you've you're not
really um asked or to question
anything you just got to listen to to
to the elders and you know follow the
rules
and that's sort of in a way i mean i
know that's a bit of an exaggeration but
that's sort of the way
we trained in western medicine this is
the way it is and
you don't question it and and really the
only tools we have in western medicine
are you know pharmaceuticals or surgery
so
you don't think out of the box we're not
really taught
to question or think about are there
other ways we're not really taught
to really look for the underlying causes
of a problem
and we're not really taught to keep
people healthy we
taught to treat disease or serious
disease so there are many shortcomings
in western medicine now
western medicine is fantastic if you're
acutely ill
or you break a bone i'm not knocking
western medicine but to take that model
and use and extrapolate that model for
all
you know all our problems in in the
culture today
is you know we end up with a very
limited way of treating people in a very
narrow way
and if you're not prepared to see the
shortcomings of the system
then your patients suffer so
all right we're back in the bush what
were they doing
that right i haven't got a clue i mean
they were throwing bone they were doing
weird stuff which i thought was quackery
but because i was intrigued by the
culture to me this was more interesting
from a cultural perspective than a
medical perspective
um but i did notice that some patients
that we couldn't help
you know were sometimes getting better
so it sort of was there at the back of
my mind
and then after that but i still thought
african medicine was
[__] and there was nothing to it and
then i went to work in a
private practice in in the suburbs in
white suburbia
and i actually happened to work with a
very hip doctor who
happened to be the doctor for a lot of
the detainees he was also very
progressive and liberal
um and uh he was also a little bit open
and
the the he had a part of his practice
with
sort of the artsy community of
johannesburg
so we'd have these artsy people coming
in to me and they had seen the homeopath
and they had gotten better come in and
they'd tell me well my migraine
i went to the homeopath and got better i
went to the accu but there was one
acupuncturist in johannesburg
i went to the acupuncturist and my back
got better
so i was you know realizing that
when i was seeing these people they were
coming in with problems that i couldn't
help in western medicine
and they were telling me they were going
to these quacks and they were getting
better
and i went to paul who was my mentor the
doctor i was working with i said paul
what the hell is going on you know and
he laughed at me and he said you know
people get better in spite of what we do
your job is
is to actually listen to them and
support them with whatever they're doing
and but but that started really opening
my mind and
then i immigrated to america because my
wife and i didn't want to live under
apartheid
and i had to to get a license in new
york i had to do three years
as an in an internship and i got a job
in the south bronx
because they sponsored me for green card
the south bronx in 1984 was pretty burnt
out area full of crack addicts and
heroin addicts
and american doctors didn't want to work
there so they were able to sponsor me
for a green card
and i started my residency there and
after a few weeks i realized that i
don't want to be a doctor in america
because the medicine was very different
in south africa we didn't have the money
to do all these tests on people we had
to take a really good history
talk to people examine them and come up
with some type of treatment protocol
in america you just very quick history
very brief exam
you do a lot of blood you do an ekg you
do a chest x-ray
and then you read up about it and
present it to the professor the next day
there was no relationship the
relationship with the patient was not
emphasized at all and there happened to
be an
acupuncture clinic attached to the
hospital doing
acupuncture for detox and because i was
so disillusioned
with with western medicine i went to
check out
the acupuncture clinic and i walked into
this clinic in this burnt out
area in this room with about
20 chairs with these heroin addicts
sitting quietly with needles in their
ears
and i went this is interesting you know
these were the same patients in the
wards that were pulling out their ivs
and they were swearing at you i don't
know if
you've ever been around addicts getting
off heroin or crack
and they're pretty tough patients and in
the wards you know we're treating them
and they were really difficult
to treat because you know they were
aggressive and
they were you know shouting and
screaming and um you you had to sedate
them and here
i walked into this room and there were
these
20 odd addicts sitting quietly with
needles in their ears
so for the next three years because i
had to do three years in the hospital
i started spending my time between the
hospital
where i seen acutely ill and you know
sick patients
and then going to the acupuncture clinic
and checking it out so
um i saw then that the future would be
the combination of the two because the
one was particularly good at one thing
and not particularly good at the other
and this and and vice versa
so it was like a no-brainer i didn't
have to think about it it was like so
obvious to me
that the the future is somehow combining
the two and that was sort of the
beginning of my journey the interesting
part of that story though
is that you go and present this stuff to
your peers and they basically do reject
it and they say this is crazy
and if you go down this path it's
basically going to be the death of your
career
so that to me when i heard you describe
sort of the different ways of thought
like you said
western medicine you're basically
thinking of the body as a machine
and what ends up happening is when
you're thinking from a pharmacological
perspective
when the czech oil light comes on you
put a band-aid over it so you can't see
it
and whereas in the eastern tradition
you think of it as a garden and when a
leaf is brown you don't paint it green
you go figure out what's wrong with the
soil or whatever and i thought oh my god
that's
really a brilliant analogy and
understanding there are times where
you're gonna deal with the body like a
machine like i
imagine in the bronx you must have at
some point dealt with absolutely acute
traumas and things like that
so um i just thought that was
interesting and i heard you speak sort
of reverently
about surgery when somebody is in a
position where that's
exactly what they need and it borders on
sort of miraculous
and so now with that in mind what
prompts you to
write the new rules of aging like so
many other things in my career
it just happened because
i just written a book called how to be
well where i thought i put a lot of my
information from the last 35 whatever
years of practice into a
user-friendly manual and i'd been
starting to explore
a lot of the you know there's been more
and more research on aging
lately and you know becoming aware of
all this
new interesting research on aging so i
said well let's do a book on aging
and that's how it happens so as you dive
into it
what what were some of those early
things in the new research that's coming
out that really caught your eye that
people should be aware of that are
you know if they either heed the advice
or ignore the advice you know
it's going to have significant impact on
their life well
a couple of things i've noticed you know
we do in in my practice
i measure a lot of biomarkers which are
sort of the downstream
measurements of lifestyle changes for
for the most part
and for instance as a holistic doctor in
the early days i was
sort of semi-vegetarian mainly
pescatarian
coming from south africa eating lots of
grains lots of fruits
no red meat i thought that was the way
to go and i became pre-diabetic eating
what i thought was a healthy diet
were you overweight at that point or not
i mean i've never been overweight but i
had a bit of a stomach for me yes i was
overweight but i thought that was just
part of
what it was yeah i had a double chin
yeah i was
i didn't realize i was overweight until
i went on a paleo diet and i just
automatically lost weight and felt
fantastic and i said [__]
excuse my language this is interesting
this sort of goes against
what my thinking is eating a lot of fat
and you know protein and grains taking
grains out
and um so i saw what happened to me and
then i started
doing it with my patients and i saw the
excellent results with my patients and
then
i was going along happily and i started
when i started getting to the anti-aging
research
you know i started reading about you
know what some people are calling
longevity genes
the research was showing that uh animal
protein
too much animal protein can actually
stimulate
the mtor longevity gene which is
not good for aging because that's the
one particular gene you don't want to
stimulate as you get older
and i won't cause the cells to to divide
too much
what's the what's the problem the
problem is
animal protein the amino acid profile
has got high methionine in particular
lysine
ii and a lot of methionine in particular
stimulates this longevity gene and when
you stimulate
mtor it inhibits autophagy which is your
self-cleansing mechanisms so it actually
works against you in terms of aging
until you're about 40 or 45
you're growing and you reproducing and
you want to be strong and animal protein
is actually a good thing
um i'm not against animal protein if
it's well sourced
but once you start getting to 45 50 it's
more about
preservation and maintenance and the way
to do that is you you actually want to
keep that particularly important
mechanism of autophagy
going strong because a lot of things
start your functioning starts decreasing
as you get older a little bit
so you want to preserve as much as you
can
so you don't so that functioning doesn't
decrease as much
as it normally would whether it's
mitochondrial function
or this self-cleansing mechanism
self-cleansing mechanism is an important
one
so i started looking for what are all
the ways to prevent
that happening quicker you know first of
all i started eating less than fasting
you know i started looking for ways of
of stimulating or triggering
these longevity genes or the autophagy
mechanism so i started fasting more now
now i only eat two meals a day for
instance um
i don't eat as much and i still eat
animal protein you know
i'm not against animal protein i just
don't eat as much
so i don't think one has to stop but i
do think
you know it depends how old you are but
when you get into your 60s you
definitely don't want to lose muscle
mass because muscle
not only keeps you strong and and and
vital as you get older but it also has a
metabolic function
you know everyone talks about losing um
bone mass but sarcopenia the loss of
muscle is
really important as you get older so
it's actually a tricky
balance this protein issue as you get
older but i think you've got to find
that fine balance because you don't want
to lose muscle mass
and actually animal protein is is a good
way of maintaining that so
it's finding that fine balance you know
i use a lot of collagen now
because collagen animal protein coming
from animal collagen
um doesn't have high methionine so in
terms of
animal protein that's a pretty good
protein
to use for in aging so
before we add anything new i want to go
back through some of the steps so
anybody listening can really begin to
implement this so
first we go from a pescetarian
high grain lots of fruits diet
causing pre-diabetic problems that we
weren't really aware of we go paleo
which i
guess will sort of define as whole foods
um higher maybe in protein and fat
lower in the grains and carbohydrates we
start feeling better i'm guessing your
inflammation is going down
your weight loss begins to happen sort
of effortlessly
um and now this thing around as we get
older we have to be
more thoughtful about mtor i want to i
want to park there for a minute
so if basically if there is something in
animal protein
in the amino acid profile of animal
protein that
triggers mtor and mtor disrupts
autophagy for the first time i sort of
really get
why that then becomes problematic so
i get why you say hey sometimes maybe
animal protein but sometimes maybe not
because of depending on your age
sarcopenia you can go to the point where
you're not
you're triggering no mtor which means
you're not building anything which means
that now you can get yourself into a
muscle problem
and so you've really got to find that
balance as you get older
so right but i think what i do want to
say
because i don't want to you know we tend
to reduce you know we're very
reductionist
in the way we think it's not just about
mtor i just think that's a factor to
think about
rather than um the be-all and end-all i
think it's just eff
that's why i decreased my animal protein
rather than saying animal protein
is bad you know i don't think it's
healthy when you're
older just to keep growing and getting
stronger and and building and building
and building
it's really that that idea of it's more
about
preserving and maintaining as we get
older rather than growing stronger and
stronger
and precisely give your body a dangerous
signal
that could turn cancerous why would that
be bad exactly so you don't want too
many things that are abnormal to grow
because if you're still into growth
unfortunately sometimes cancers can grow
too
abnormal things can grow that's not
exactly
the idea so you want to sort of it's a
fine balance
and you know everything's working
together how you sleep how you deal with
stress
how kind you are um if you have purpose
in life
um if you have gratitude so they're all
these many factors working together
it's not just about you know people who
so rigid about their diet whether it's a
paleo diet
or a vegan diet i think it's probably
more unhealthy
i think just be smart about and be aware
of it rather than
be obsessed about it and why um
you're saying that a vegan diet is more
unhealthy than a paleo diet
well for most people i would say that
yes
most of the vegans that i have seen as
patients tend to be nutritionally
depleted
you know i have i have a couple of
patients who are vegans and
are really healthy i think that's more
unusual
than unhealthy people eating a paleo
diet
put it put it that way but you know once
again i'm not i don't think there's one
right diet for everyone
i mean people fall into buckets though
like yes
it because i doubt it's infinite
variability right so
people begin to clump into types have
you ever given thought to like is it
five types 50 types
i mean you're asking really interesting
questions yet tom
you know i think there are variations
and i think it's affected by your age
too i do think especially as we get
older we need to eat less
and as i said you know less produce i
think
the the general rule for me is we eating
as few sugars and starches as possible
is is sort of generic um then
once you get beyond that for some people
grains are fine for a lot of people i
find grains
are a problem so my generic diet for
most people
is sort of a paleo or low carb diet
once we go from there it's like some
people do better with some more
you know i saw someone today who is on a
keto diet and i've seen so many people
do really well on a keto diet
you know she was on the keto diet she
couldn't understand what was going on
and we did a genetic profile on her
there's a genetic test i did
and sure enough it came up that she had
a difficult time with
fats too many fats so now we're going to
cut down her fats and she'll probably do
a little bit better
so i think you know my standard diet
would be a low carb diet for
everyone and then after that it's
you know sort of the balancing how much
fat how much protein what do you want to
do if you want to lose weight
sometimes just a high protein diet will
do it so it all depends on what your
needs are
but you know once we get older i think
eating less
eating very low carb and and
sort of balancing that protein need with
your
your muscle mass is is
probably the most important but i always
like people to think of food as
something they enjoy i hate putting
people on
diets you know i think people need to
learn to enjoy and
their food and find a way of eating
that's sustainable for them
and you know we we're living in an
interesting time because
a lot of this can be measured ourselves
you know the self
monitoring you know the whole biohacking
world is interesting i hate the word
biohacking
and i find some of the biohacking world
a little bit too young and masculine
but the idea of monitoring yourself and
making
changes accordingly is very empowering
and very
you know so i think it's all good i
think it's
how you do it and how you are with that
information
because we can't lose
that aspect of our humanity
you know you've probably heard me talk
about ubuntu you know that african term
what makes us human is the humanity we
show each other
you know as you get as i get older i'm
less dogmatic
more aware of of the subtleties in life
and how important
being kind is how important you know
someone finding their passion whether
it's with their kids or
either work whatever it is all these
these um
these factors that we don't really
talk about or think about as powerful as
or as powerful as diet i mean i think
diet and sleep and exercise
are really important but are they
more important than you know your
humanity
and whether you're grateful whether you
have purpose in life so
you know as you get older you start
looking at the world in a sort of
idea anyway starting to look at you know
looking back and
and thinking about so many of the people
that were healthy and were unhealthy
even some of the people who are eating
really well exercising
would get sick what is going on in their
lives you start looking at
these patterns and the pattern i'm
seeing more and more of what i'm
becoming more and more aware of is you
know
these these um intangibles being
probably even more important than
you know what we we look for in in
someone's health in terms of what
they're eating how they're exercising
how they're sleeping i think sleep is
another huge issue
my next book's on sleep that's
interesting yeah sleep is something
that's very near and dear to my heart
um as somebody who's professing a lot
about working hard and you know very
yang
as you say but i always am i take time
to tell people i sleep as much as i need
sleep like i prioritize sleep
right um it is it is a unique form of
misery to be tired all the time and
you're just not productive i do not
understand people that just constantly
sacrifice sleep
but i want to push in on this yin and
yang idea
that you were basically just walking us
through maybe not a name but i i have a
feeling that that's exactly what you
mean you've got the yang of like
exercising and you know tracking data
and making sure that your
mtor is in the right place you know like
really going in on it and then there's
are you loving somebody are you
connected to people
are you grateful have you learned
meditation and relaxation
and what's interesting is and correct me
if i'm wrong but i think you look at
that as
important not in some ephemeral way but
like it's actually
impacting you physiologically absolutely
no question about it yeah
and i think what's interesting and
what's you know what's happening now
with measurements you know whether it's
the ora ring and these new measurements
where we can measure
blood sugar and we're going to be
starting to measure more you know the
self
monitoring i think we're going to
actually start becoming
able to see how these
yen aspects or these softer aspects are
actually affecting
all these other you know our sleep
and how we feel you know in the past it
was hard to put it all together or to
to ascertain was it are you doing well
because
you really love what you're doing and
you got you know you're part of a
community
and you have love in your life or is it
because you changed your diet
or are you sleeping better and i think
now with self-money
and i'm very intrigued i think this new
age of medicine
is going to be this whole
combination of the blood biomarkers
self-monitoring your genetics maybe
doing
you know measuring your microbiome and i
think then the next wave is how do we
put this together in a really sensible
way
to help people take care of themselves
and let the doctors take care of acutely
ill patients because ultimately
you should be your own doctor and
monitoring um what's going on in your
life and making changes accordingly and
i think
it's sort of heading in that direction
my friends
to be legendary you need to build and
grow an audience through
powerful assessments and personalized
content
you can educate and build trust with
your audience while improving conversion
rates
outgrow is a growth marketing platform
that enables marketers to grow their
audience by creating
intuitive no code tools such
as calculators chat bots assessments and
quizzes
outgrow co-founders started by designing
a mobile app cost calculator and quickly
saw the power of interactive tools
they designed a sas tool called outgrow
that any marketer and entrepreneur can
build calculators and interactive tools
with
to improve their customer acquisition
today outgrow is used by over
5 000 companies like salesforce
adobe and marketo as well as creators
freelancers and entrepreneurs it has a
powerful builder with a wide range of
embeds over 1 000 templates along with
the analytics and integrations every
modern marketer would want
you can sign up for outgrow at dot co
forward slash tom that's outro dot
co forward slash tom and get a
special 30-day free trial with no credit
card required
start taking action today and check out
outgrow
right now all right guys take care and
be legendary
yeah the one thing that i'm very curious
about in your work is
as we move forward and we're balancing
this yin and yang and we're looking at
both sides
what are the things that we should be
looking at are there certain biomarkers
is there amount of time in the sun is
there
you know number of times per week that
you're meditating or is it
strictly blood markers like what are the
things that we should be paying
attention to that tell us we're on the
right path
right so the way i see this downstream
you have your markers that you can
measure
and then upstream is these lifestyle
changes or whatever you want to call
them that are affecting those you know
now we have continuous blood glucose
monitors i think they're going to get
more and more sophisticated in terms of
what you can measure i think the next
wave is you're going to be able to do a
prick and you can measure probably 15 or
biomarkers you know we do lots and lots
in my office which may or may not be
necessary
but i think the biomarkers are something
that is just
one aspect to measure then you can
measure your sleep
you know you can have your fit but there
are many
things you can measure and then you can
make
your changes your lifestyle changes
whether it's changing your diet
how you exercise when you exercise how
you sleep
um if you're angry and and
fighting with your spouse if you not
happy at work
um and i think a lot of this can be done
out of the doctor's office
and i think a lot of it will be done out
of the doctor's office which is exciting
yeah one of the the things in there that
i think is really interesting is that
idea of beginning to track pattern
recognition as it associates with
blood markers my wife struggled
profoundly
with microbiome issues for years and the
only real breakthrough came when she
finally got
religious about tracking what she ate
and how she felt
and once she started doing that you just
find patterns that you
never would have guessed exactly and
there were things that
you know her doctor told her would
bother her based on an allergy test and
they didn't
and then there were things that she was
supposedly fine with but just
every time she ate it she would have an
episode
and so finally she was just like i'm
just gonna trust like
i eat this there's a problem whether i
can identify why there's a problem or
not is totally separate
and so we ended up finding out even
though she isn't gluten
um she doesn't have celiac and doesn't
even register as gluten intolerant
if she eats gluten it wracks her stomach
and then
okay so you know it says she has an
interesting thing so
now we have much more sophisticated or
sensitive tests for gluten so
in the old days you used to do a celiac
test which just tests two or three or
four
antigen there's actually a test you can
do now it's called the wheat zoomer by
vibrant wellness that actually measures
different gluten antigens
and a lot of patients now that we're
doing it a lot of patients come back
with acetic ones negative
but they're still sensitive maybe the
glyden or something else in it
so your wife's experience is actually
not atypical
um and the other thing i find about um
the microbiome is you know you can be
censored to a
food and think you it's a food but it's
actually your microbiome
and you alter the microbiome whether you
use antimicrobial herbs or whatever you
do your sensitivity to the food
disappears
so it's very so this whole microbiome
story and the gut story is fascinating
and i'm obsessed with it in my practice
i mean that's what we deal with all the
time
but i'm i'm seeing now some of the
testing and
and people's experiences are correlating
more
so we're interested we're entering a
really interesting time in medicine i
mean
even in the last couple of years i think
things have gotten much
much more sophisticated which is
exciting
that's exciting um there's no one size
that fits all i'm totally with you on
that
but just like with diet you were sort of
ah like here's the thing i start with it
won't work for everybody but this is
sort of as close
universal as we're gonna get i'm gonna
lay out what i think is as close to
universal
for solving microbiome problems as
possible and you tell me if i'm totally
crazy you've
experienced a lot more so if i had to if
i had somebody and they said look i'm
having gut issues i would say okay first
of all
you're all sugar's dead and gone stop
with those
refined carbohydrates those are gone um
you're going to kill your sort of you're
going to kill your nightshades
you're going to only whole foods nothing
that
is nothing's gone anywhere near
glyphosate first of all
and then no uh no grain fed
in any phase so grass-fed grass finish
the whole nine that actually really
matters if you're eating animal protein
no vegetable oil and no soy products
and did i say gluten if i didn't say
gluten already no gluten
right now that's about as universal as i
can think of and no dairy
right i think that is almost right
my experience has been um because
you know just clinically i'm just seeing
this all the time i mean
my practice is now full of a lot of
young women in particular with
autoimmune problems
and what i've noticed is a lot of the
time there's a microbiome
imbalance there's either an overgrowth
or whether we call it sibo
or candida or there's is this imbalance
in the gut
that the diet alone will not address
you need to use i start with herbs
you you need to use antimicrobial herbs
to sort of kill the bad guys that's very
simplistic but it's
let's leave it at that is there like
over-the-counter stuff that we can get
or is this prescription
yeah a lot of this is over-the-counter
this is where you start with
um you know what we do is i usually use
the a lot of the companies that are
coming out with paired groups
of these um well i use different
companies but you sort of
pair a mixture of antifungals
antiparasitics and
antibacterials together and
you see how they respond because if you
on the right track within two weeks
or three weeks people will feel a lot
better their gas will get better their
bloating gets better
um they start pooping better so
you can actually tell clinically in a
very short time it's not that you solve
the problem within a few weeks but
within two or three weeks
you get an idea if you're on the right
track and then once
you see that on a path then you can
maybe start adding probiotics
maybe then you can maybe start adding
prebiotics
maybe or resistance starts uh the diet
will always
start off as you sort of talked about
but you need to do more than the diet
because the so many people come in with
uh you know let's call it a severe
imbalance in the microbiome
that needs these antimicrobial herbs to
actually treat them
i'd say 70 percent of the young woman i
see with autoimmune problems have a
history of taking a lot of antibiotics
as kids so my generation of doctors we
over
treated we used antibiotics so liberally
when people
when these young you know let's say 25
year old
young woman was a kid she had so many
antibiotics and that started altering
her microbiome
some people even probably start before
if they weren't breastfed
or caesarean section but for the most
part it really starts with chronic use
of antibiotics for
chronic tonsillitis chronic ear
infections chronic sinusitis
acne urine tract infections on and on
and on
so that's a tragedy you know that's a
real tragedy
and you know i think it's changing you
know doctors are less liberal with
antibiotics
but it has had you know severe negative
consequences on a lot of
people's health no question now there
are a few things that came up in the
book that
i was surprised to see make multiple uh
appearances
one was mushrooms and one was cbd um
yeah talk to me about i'm i'm more
interested in in the cbd because
of um i have struggled profoundly with
anxiety and
you mentioned that that can be pretty
useful with anxiety
um so if you give us like the the 30
second breakdown of mushrooms and then i
want to get to cbd
you know mushrooms are something that
i've you know when you
when you learn or you study chinese
medicine mushrooms are have always been
a part of
um my training some of them have
anti-immune effects some of them have
brain
like lion's mane is good for the bread
so they have
different effects i mean there's some
interesting work
i'm not i'm definitely no expert on
mushrooms i'm just quite intrigued by
them and um
uh i use them a lot i use it myself and
i recommend them but i'm definitely
expert in one of my
proteges one of the health coaches
that worked under me
father had pancreatic cancer and she
went to help him and
he's actually much better he's really
done well and she was using a lot of
mushrooms and
cbd and thc so she also was
someone who actually in combination like
specifically mushroom cbd and thc
together yes interesting so
i know a little bit about cbd but not a
lot
when it's oral is it just a tablet well
it can come in
in various you know the various ways of
getting it into you from
from a cream you can put on to vaping to
tinctures to tablets and the big things
that i've seen it help with
and and one of the few things that are
as effective as cbd are for
anxiety and sleep it also can help
inflammation but
the two big issues that i
use it for a lot are anxiety
and sleep it just sort of takes the edge
off
and certain strains and everyone's
different the dosage people need and the
strains people need seem to be different
but when it when you get something that
works it can be magic
from the beginning i'm i'm less
concerned with research although i think
research
needs to be done if i see something
working i'll go for it and tell people
to experiment i mean i've learned so
much
experience experimenting on myself and
my patients
you see what works the same thing
doesn't work for the same you know for
different people
so you need you know why is an
interesting thing but
cbd is definitely one of those things
the dosage
differs um different strains i mean i
have cbd next to my bed when i'm
feeling agitated i'll pop some cbd if i
wake up in the middle of the night i'll
you know i'll put some under my tongue
so i'm a yeah i love cbd so you take it
in a liquid form
yeah i take it because if you take it
in a pill form it's going to take a
longer time
to be absorbed so it'll probably take a
good hour to two before you start
getting the effects
if you take it with a liquid form you're
going to get some sublingual
absorption goes through the you know
absorb through the mucous membrane so
it works quicker and obviously vaping
which i don't
ever do will work the quickest and
vaping is problematic because of the
particulate matter going yeah
exactly exactly so i have
uh my wife has a
loving relationship with thc i will put
it that way
and i've never understood it i always
thought it was crazy i was like this
just makes me feel like i want to be
asleep
and then now with the explosion of
different strands and stuff
here she had me try one that was
supposedly like really creative and i'm
obsessed anything that can help me be
more creative i'm all for it
so i tried it and i was like this is
this doesn't even seem like the same
drug that i had tried before and it's
simply a different strand
so i was like wow this is really
interesting like there's so much to
explore
uh so i i've sort of renewed my interest
in finding things that
um that can alter your consciousness is
maybe the right way to think of it i'm
way too big of a chicken to do
what they call the hero dose of
mushrooms uh that does not strike me as
something i'm ready for yeah
it's interesting to be honest what i
think also opened up my mind when i this
is when i was
much younger you know we did some quite
a bit at night a lot but some lsd in
south africa
when i was still at medical school
and finishing medical school and i think
that may have
you know it opens up your mind you start
realizing that whoa this is interesting
and now there's so much research using
you know
some institution and then for for
depression and for all sorts of things
so
i think there's a whole area there that
needs to be explored and there's
something there it's not something that
i do or know enough about or use
for my patients so um but i do think
there's something there
to me that's just another medication
right but
you know with anxiety and sleep i mean
sleep is such a
common problem anxiety is such a common
problem and you know
for so many years it's been you know
getting people to meditate which is very
difficult and
trying to to you know get them to
deal with their stress um using some
nutrients like l-theanine and gaba and
then cbd
comes and like people start
taking cbd and like you're getting these
interesting results so that's you know
i'm always intrigued by
new products or things like that so
that's why
cbd got so much uh
um you know got a quite a bit more space
in maybe something else in the book
because i do think it's an important
and relatively benign therapeutic tool
that needs to be explored further
so knowing that lifestyle choices are
your first
go-to if just in summary you had to put
together
three or four things that everybody
should be doing whether it's cutting out
sugar or more sleep whatever
what are sort of your top three or four
things that if everybody did it would
help them age better yeah cutting out
sugar
more sleep meditation or something
you know meditation doesn't have to be
sitting on a cushion you know with a
mantra
your meditation could be knitting your
meditation could be
um being in the garden taking a walk sir
but
sort of something where you're getting
out of your
you know that busy mind i think that is
you know really really helpful and
i would put you know those things we
talked about being kind to yourself
being kind to others
um having meaning in life you know
having a passion for something is so
it's probably the most anti-aging you
know when i think of all
my patients who've aged well they've all
had some meaning in their lives and the
meaning may have been their
grandchildren
it doesn't have to be saving the world
you know but whatever it was it was
really meaningful for them
you know obviously exercise two is
really important but i do
think um these those softer aspects and
that having meaning to me is like
probably number one but not everyone can
have meaning
but you know i i think you know if you
angry all the time
and um you're not able to forgive and
um you know all these little things eat
you up
and have an effect on you it's the
ordinary things that we do on a daily
basis
that have an extraordinary effect on our
health
so when you start making habits of these
little things
like taking a walk in the forest going
for a walk on the beach
spending time in nature listening to
music you enjoy
being surrounded by people you love now
these little things
that we don't realize on medicine are
just as powerful
as any drug um
so you know i think fasting as we get
older to be quite honest
eating less and and time restricted
eating i think
is is is an incredible we've seen
incredible results
with fasting in in our practice with
measuring biomarkers
especially whether we do an advanced
lipid panel i mean we've seen
remarkable results with people fasting
i mean it's really interesting now
usually it's not
fasting and in the time that they're
eating they're eating crap it's usually
going together
with a a much healthier diet but i mean
these little things that you can do that
are not expensive and
make a huge difference and you feel the
clarity i mean
i was always a huge believer in having a
big shake for breakfast and i used to
put all my peanuts do
breakfast is the meal you got to have a
big breakfast and you're going to feel
great the whole day
i never realized how much clearer i was
until i skipped breakfast and i started
fasting
and how much like you know if you want
to see me as a patient come see me in
the morning i'm really on
so you know it's very interesting how
we all get brainwashed to think a
certain way and
something comes up and you change and
you go oh that's interesting
and as you say monitor yourself see how
you feel
the proofs in the pudding you'll feel
better you'll either lose weight or
you'll
be more clear um your sleep better i
mean things
you you definitely experience changes
in the way you feel and to me that's
what's important very well said
man this has been a lot of fun where can
people
connect with you online do you have a
social presence
yeah drfrank lipman.com is a website
drfranklipman.com and i have a
newsletter which is very good i
am on twitter um i am sort of on
instagram my health coach
does my instagram i don't really do it
um mainly my website i do
i post a lot because i want to get
information out
but i'm not the one who sits and answers
and gets involved in
in in social media per se i like to
just put the information out and i'm you
know i'm too old for that so don't
expect me to answer you back on
social media that that is fine given how
much information that you're putting out
there and i will say that
um you know whether you tweet people
back or not given
how much amazing information is in not
only the most recent book the new rules
for aging well but
your whole catalog is extraordinary and
you know
best sellers among them so highly
encourage everybody to
check that out and speaking of things
you guys should check out if you haven't
already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be
legendary take care thank you guys so
much for watching and being a part of
this community if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential